---
title: "Preface"
---

Utilitarianism is taught in introductory ethics classes around the world. But textbook presentations of utilitarianism often misconstrue the theory, failing to present either the strongest arguments in favor of it or its most sophisticated defenses against objections. They also fail to present the distinctive practical contributions of utilitarianism: they fail to show what a life lived in accordance with utilitarian ideals would really look like.

We wanted to help rectify this situation. So we've written this textbook aiming to present utilitarianism in a clear and broadly sympathetic light. Ethics remains controversial, of course, and we certainly don't expect all readers to agree that utilitarianism is ultimately correct. But we hope to convey a better sense of why one might reasonably find it appealing, and how it can address objections that you might otherwise have assumed were devastating.

We also discuss at length the real-life practical implications of utilitarian moral theory. Throughout the text, we emphasize the utilitarian case for striving to make the world a better place, as effectively as possible, while respecting commonsense norms against harming others.

The most practically important features of utilitarianism are its _impartial beneficence_ and its focus on _effectiveness_. No other moral view so emphasizes the importance of helping others, regardless of what groups they belong to or how they relate to the agent. As Chapter 6 emphasizes, utilitarianism expands our moral circle. Not only does it condemn racism, sexism, and other discrimination already widely condemned today; it also equally values the well-being even of people in faraway countries, of non-human animals, and of future generations. And, as Chapter 7 (Acting on Utilitarianism) explains, utilitarianism directs us to _prioritize_ our efforts and resources so as to do more good rather than less. Utilitarianism thus naturally supports _effective altruism_: the project of finding the best ways to help others, and putting them into practice. This may include focusing on global rather than local poverty (as money goes further in the poorest countries, and can make a bigger difference to its beneficiaries), on relieving the suffering of factory-farmed animals (which is both immense in scale and significantly tractable), and on anticipating and addressing global catastrophic risks, which threaten the existence of all future generations. We may most effectively contribute to these causes via our charitable donations, career choice, or outreach that encourages others to join the effort.

One needn't accept utilitarianism in order to agree with these practical implications. Chapter 8 (on Near-Utilitarian Alternatives) explores possible departures from utilitarianism, assessing which ones do or do not threaten its beneficent practical implications. Indeed, all three authors of this text are personally much more confident of the merits of doing good effectively than we are in utilitarianism as a moral theory.

Chapter 2 introduces the crucial distinction between using utilitarianism as a _criterion_ for assessing the moral quality of actions (and proposed decision procedures) versus using it _as_ a _decision procedure_ to directly guide our actions in practice. Many objections to utilitarianism rest on mistakenly believing that utilitarians use the theory not only as a criterion but also as a decision procedure. However, as we emphasize in Chapter 6 (on Practical Ethics) utilitarians reject making every decision based on a utilitarian calculus. This fact substantially weakens several of the objections discussed in Chapter 9, including the concern that utilitarianism recommends wicked-seeming actions whenever the agent believes them to do more good than harm. Instead, utilitarian goals may be best achieved by following reliable rules and heuristics (such as commonsense moral virtues and respect for individual rights). So, we believe that utilitarians in practice should aspire to live in accordance with virtues like integrity, trustworthiness, law-abidingness, and fairness, as well as avoiding harming others unless under the most extreme circumstances.

While we are all broadly sympathetic to utilitarianism, our precise attitudes vary. For example, Richard outright rejects the hedonism of classical utilitarianism, and is undecided about the extent to which partiality towards our loved ones and desert-adjustments may be intrinsically warranted. But he's very confident that some form of consequentialism is correct, and most likely one that at least roughly approximates utilitarianism in important cases.

In contrast, Will thinks that classical utilitarianism is the most plausible version of utilitarianism. However, he’s not very confident in utilitarianism itself: he puts significant credence on non-consequentialist moral views, too, and thinks it’s likely that we haven’t yet even conceived of the correct moral theory. He takes this _moral uncertainty_ to further bolster the practical case for deontic constraints against violating rights, and for making further inquiry into ethics a moral priority.

As philosophers, we would not wish for our readers to leave this text with the impression that utilitarianism is unassailable or obviously correct. We think the theory has a lot going for it, and we've tried to bring that out. But, like any philosophical view, it also faces serious challenges and objections. We encourage readers to critically assess our arguments, and reflect for themselves upon what they think ultimately matters, and how best to live and act in light of those reflections.

## A note on the source material

This textbook is adapted from material we have published online at **utilitarianism.net**. The web edition contains supplemental resources that may be of interest to readers, including guest essays by leading academics on specific topics relating to utilitarianism. We're grateful to Hackett Publishing for working with us to produce this convenient book edition while the web edition remains, as always, free and open access. All author royalties from this book will be donated to charity.

## Author contributions

Authors are listed in order of contribution, with chapter-specific details available on the web edition (as not all authors contributed to the writing of all chapters).

— Richard Yetter Chappell, Darius Meissner, and William MacAskill
