---
title: "Foreword"
layout: book
---

**Katarzyna de Lazari-Radek & Peter Singer**

This introduction to utilitarianism appears at a propitious moment. Utilitarians have long strived to bring about practical changes to promote happiness and relieve suffering, criticizing practices that most people accepted as natural and inevitable conditions of human existence. Yet, not since the Philosophical Radicals, inspired by Jeremy Bentham, campaigned to extend voting rights and reform prisons in the early nineteenth century has utilitarianism attracted as much public attention as it does today. Nor has it ever been as prominent in discussions of ethics among teachers and researchers of philosophy.

Even in its nineteenth century heyday, however, utilitarianism was widely ridiculed, and the reforms urged by leading utilitarians were vehemently opposed. Conservative defenders of the status quo succeeded in delaying, for several decades, reforms such as votes for women, the legalization of same-sex relationships, medical aid in dying, and laws to adequately protect the welfare of animals. In many countries that opposition continues to block reforms that would reduce suffering. Nevertheless, thinking that is broadly utilitarian, even if not explicitly so, is having greater worldwide impact than it has ever had before.

That impact became apparent when the Covid-19 pandemic swept the world in 2020. Governments almost everywhere, faced with a new virus for which there was initially no vaccine, instituted lockdowns—depriving their citizens of the rights to freedom of movement and freedom of association. Did the citizens rise up, proclaiming that these rights are sacrosanct, and not to be overridden by the goal of achieving the most well-being for all? No. Overwhelmingly they accepted and supported the suppression of these rights for the greater good. They may not have conceived of this greater good as sweepingly as utilitarians do—they may have been moved by concerns for their own good, or the good of their parents, children, or other loved ones—but their governments usually did profess to be acting for the greater good of the community as a whole. That was true even of the United States, a country that began with a declaration of a supposedly self-evident and unalienable right to liberty. When it came to the crunch, rights yielded to the calculus of what government action would bring about the greatest benefit, based on the best available evidence in that situation of uncertainty. This is exactly what utilitarians would do.

Several other twenty-first century changes in ethical thinking and practice, consistent with utilitarian views, have overcome the opposition of institutions that follow inflexible non-utilitarian ethical doctrines, especially hardline religious teachings. During the past two or three decades, we have seen major shifts in public morality on issues like same-sex relationships. In several countries, these shifts culminated in the legalization of homosexual marriage and of voluntary euthanasia or medically assisted dying, allowing the terminally ill to die peacefully at a time of their own choosing, without further suffering. The movement to protect animals from suffering has also gained strength, and as utilitarians would urge, is increasingly—though still insufficiently—focused on reducing the vast quantity of suffering we inflict on billions of intensively confined chickens, pigs, and fish, rather than on the much smaller number of abused dogs and cats.

The newest and perhaps most promising example of the influence of utilitarian thinking is the effective altruism movement, which began in the first decade of the present century. It is a social movement and a philosophical outlook that emphasizes doing the most good we can, with the resources we have available, for all sentient beings, whether they are close at hand or on the other side of the planet, and whether they are living now or are yet to be conceived. While effective altruism and utilitarianism are different in important respects—the former being more ecumenical and making fewer controversial assumptions than the latter—the effective altruism movement takes seriously and seeks to implement key utilitarian principles, like beneficence, impartiality, welfarism, and aggregation.

Utilitarianism, then, is an ethical view whose time has come, with the opportunity to do far more good than it has ever done. It pushes us to examine the boundaries of our moral thinking, and consider the interests of those who we often leave out of our concern—such as the global poor, nonhuman animals, and future generations.

Yet, utilitarianism remains contested. To make up our minds about it, we need to start by stating clearly what it is, examine its main varieties, and consider the reasons for holding or rejecting these varieties. This is the purpose of the book you are now reading. It discusses, thoughtfully and clearly, what makes utilitarianism distinctive from other ethical theories, alongside key questions like _what even is the “well-being” that utilitarians seek to promote?_; _How demanding is utilitarianism?_; _How should we think about actions affecting future generations, such as having children?_; _How much does utilitarianism diverge from commonsense morality?_, and many more.

Before we conclude, we want to mention two unusual aspects of this work. The first is that it is written by three authors, who partially disagree about which is the best moral theory. There can be many theoretical disagreements even among those sympathetic to utilitarianism. Richard Yetter Chappell—like the classical utilitarians, Bentham, Mill and Sidgwick—subscribes to consequentialism, the view that the right action is the one that has the best consequences. He parts from that trio, however, in rejecting hedonism, the view that the only intrinsic good to be promoted is happiness. Will MacAskill, on the other hand, thinks that hedonism offers the most plausible account of which consequences matter, but has doubts about whether the right action is always the one that has the best consequences. We will put our cards on the table too: we are consequentialists and hedonists, so we differ from both Chappell and MacAskill, and agree with the classical utilitarians— especially with Sidgwick, whose book _The Methods of Ethics_ we rank as possibly the best ever written on ethics.[^1]

Despite these theoretical disagreements, we all largely agree on the implications of utilitarianism in practice, for what it means to live an ethical life. This is the unusual feature of this book that we like best: it does not treat utilitarianism only as a theory, as so many books on ethics treat the ideas they present, but also as a live option for each of us to choose as a philosophy that guides our life. The presence of a chapter on what it is like to live as a utilitarian indicates something uniquely important about ethics, but often neglected. Studying ethics can change your life.

[^1]: We explain why we think this in Katarzyna de Lazari-Radek & Peter Singer (2014), _The Point of View of the Universe: Sidgwick and Contemporary Ethics_, Oxford: Oxford University Press.